---
layout: post
title: Adding Syscalls to Xv6
---

## Background

Xv6 is a very popular simple operating system used in many undergraduate Operating Systems courses. One of the foundations of the interactions that happen within an operating system is system calls and adding a system call to the OS is usually one of the first tasks given to someone starting out. If you came here looking for solutions to your assignment I highly recommend closing this tab and working it out on your own; I guarantee you it's not as difficult as it seems.

I'll be walking through the steps of how to add a syscall to Xv6 by adding a syscall called random which will return the [random number 4](https://xkcd.com/221).

[Jump to explanation](#explanation)

## What files to change

In order to add a working system call to your operating system you will need to edit the following files:

* [syscall.h](#syscallh)
* [syscall.c](#syscallc)
* [user.h](#userh)
* [usys.S](#usyss)
* [somelinkg](http://amazon.com)

We'll add our actual syscall to [sysproc.c](#sysproc.c) but you can also append it to any other files that contain syscalls like sysfile.c

## syscall.h

syscall.h contains the syscall numbers for each syscall in the OS.

At the bottom we'll add our new syscall with the next available number:

{% highlight c %}
#define SYS_fork    1
#define SYS_exit    2
#define SYS_wait    3
#define SYS_pipe    4
#define SYS_read    5
#define SYS_kill    6
...
#define SYS_mknod  17
#define SYS_unlink 18
#define SYS_link   19
#define SYS_mkdir  20
#define SYS_close  21
#define SYS_random 22
{% endhighlight %}

## syscall.c

syscall.c contains the functions used by syscalls to get arguments. We'll add our syscall to the array of syscalls. Remember that we defined SYS_random as 22 which corresponds to that spot in the array.

{% highlight c %}
static int (*syscalls[])(void) = {
    [SYS_fork]    sys_fork,
    [SYS_exit]    sys_exit,
    [SYS_wait]    sys_wait,
    ...
    [SYS_mkdir]   sys_mkdir,
    [SYS_close]   sys_close,
    [SYS_random]  sys_random, // will call sys_random() when syscalls[22] is chosen.
};
{% endhighlight %}

We also need to add an extern function header so the syscall can actually be called here when we define it later in a different file.

{% highlight c %}
...
extern int sys_unlink(void);
extern int sys_wait(void);
extern int sys_write(void);
extern int sys_uptime(void);
extern int sys_random(void);
{% endhighlight %}

## user.h

user.h is the file used by user programs so the user can access system call. Here we'll add our user level definition of the syscall

{% highlight c %}
...
int getpid(void);
char* sbrk(int);
int sleep(int);
int uptime(void);
int random(void);
{% endhighlight %}

## usys.S

usys.S contains a short amount of assembly code to move the number of the called syscall into the %eax register.
{% highlight c %}
...
SYSCALL(getpid)
SYSCALL(sbrk)
SYSCALL(sleep)
SYSCALL(uptime)
SYSCALL(random)
{% endhighlight %}

## sysproc.c"

sysproc.c is one of the files that contains syscalls.
{% highlight c %}
int sys_random(void) {
    return 4;
}
{% endhighlight %}

## Explanation

 The process of our syscall getting executed is as follows:

 * A user program includes 'user.h' in their program and calls 'random()' to get a random number.
 * This causes a trap which ends up in usys.S. Here 'random' is put through the SYSCALL macro which moves the numerical value of SYS_random into %eax.
 * We set the value of SYS_random to 22 in syscall.h. The macro also sets the trap number to T_SYSCALL and returns to trap.c which branches into the syscall branch and calls syscall() which was included from 'defs.h'.
 * We get the number stored in %eax to figure out which syscall to run from the onces defined in the system call table syscalls[] in syscall.c; in our case it would be syscalls[22] which is sys_random().
 * Finally, our system call returns a random number which happens to be 4 and returns it back through the trap frame to the calling function/program.
